[Link](https://www.nature.com/articles/nphys1803)

### Takeaway


### Main
* A minority of neuroscience publications are concerned about understanding the brain dynamics as a collective process. The connectionist view instead docomposes the brain into separate components and studies them individually.  
* Results from statistical physics regarding self-organizing criticality have had succesful implications in genetics, ecology, computer science, social and economics (see references). 
* This paper reviews results on emergent complex neural dynamics, where the results only recently started to be used.

**What is lacking in existing neurological models?**
* In existing work, the brain has been modelled either as 
	* 1) A low-dimensionsal version of the real system
	* 2) Hard-coded one-behaviour
	* 3) Cannot be flexible to do anything else, unless the neuronal connections are changed.
* An early paper by Hopfield managed to emerge computational properties from simple neurons [[Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational abilities]] . But it didn't really take off in the field.
* Emergent complex dynamics require the microscopic components to be nonlinear.
* Spontaneous brain activity is not random or periodic - it has complex, scale invariant patterns.

**What is required for scale-free dynamics?**
* Complexity *cannot* be embedded in the microscopic components.
* Out of short-range interactions of simple elements, long-range spatiotemporal correlated patterns must emerge.

#### Small scale: Cortical quakes
* The spread of neuronal activity dsitributes itself following an inverse power law with exponent 3/2 - exactly what's theoretically predicted for critical branchin processes.
* The precise neuronal mechanisms leading to scale-free avalanches are uncertain - mainly because avalanches can be generated by mechanisms other than critical dynamics.
* However, [[_Scaling properties of neuronal avalanches are consistent with critical dynamics]] gives five new avalanche invariants that can be used to correctly classify criticality avalanches.

### Large scale
**Observations**
* **Early observations** showed that the brain is a patterns forming system that can switch flexibly from one coherent state to another. Higher brain functions in humans such as perception, learning and goal directed movement emerge from collective neuron dynamics.
* **Today**, it is recognized that the brain spontaneously creates and reshapes complex functional networks in response to traffic between regions. Referring to a [crazy bible](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphys.2010.00015/full).
* The paper elaborates that [[fMRI data]] of various subjects should create a playground for complex dynamics research. 
**Models**
* fMRI data fitted a scale-invariant distribution for the length of time that two brain locations on average remained locked.
* Another report concluded taht networks derived from correlations of fMRI signals in human brains are indistinguashable from networks extracted from Ising models at critical temperature.










----
**Applications fo Statistical physics in various fields**
Some papers setup  characters and rules, and then lets the game play using simulation.
* Bak, P. _How Nature Works_ (Oxford Univ. Press, 1997).
* Jensen, H. J. _Self-Organized Criticality_ (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998).
* Buchanan, M. _Ubiquity_ (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2000).
* Christensen, K. & Moloney, N. R. _Complexity and Criticality_ (Imperial College Press, 2005).
* Aldana, M., Balleza, E., Kauffman, S. A. & Resendis, O. Robustness and evolvability in genetic regulatory networks. _J. Theor. Biol._ **245**, 433–448 (2007).
* Balleza, E. et al. Critical dynamics in genetic regulatory networks: Examples from four kingdoms. _PLoS ONE_ **3**, e2456 (2008).
* Lux, T. & Marchesi, M. Scaling and criticality in a stochastic multi-agent model of a financial market. _Nature_ **397**, 498–500 (1999).
* Malamud, B. D., Morein, G. & Turcotte, D. L. Forest fires: An example of self-organized critical behaviour. _Science_ **281**, 1840–1842 (1998).
* Nykter, M. et al. Gene expression dynamics in the macrophage exhibit criticality. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_ **105**, 1897–1900 (2008).
* Takayasu, M., Takayasu, H. & Fukuda, K. Dynamic phase transition observed in the internet traffic flow. _Physica A_ **277**, 248–255 (2000).
* Peters, O. & Neelin, D. Critical phenomena in atmospheric precipitation. _Nature Phys._ **2**, 393–396 (2006).
* Peters, O., Hertlein, C. & Christensen, K. A complexity view of rainfall. _Phys. Rev. Lett._ **88**, 018701 (2002).
* Peters, O. & Christensen, K. Rain: Relaxations in the sky. _Phys. Rev. E_ **66**, 036120 (2002).